Then a powerful demon, a prowler through the dark,
nursed a hard grievance. It harrowed him
90 to hear the din of the loud banquet
every day in the hall, the harp being struck
and the clear song of a skilled poet
telling with mastery of man's beginnings,
how the Almighty had made the earth
a gleaming plain girdled with waters;
in His splendour He set the sun and the moon
to be earth's lamplight, lanterns for men,
and filled the broad lap of the world
with branches and leaves; and quickened life
in every other thing that moved.
100 0
And so mankind's lord laid down laws,
peace-pacts and protections: for His punishment waits
for the one who breaks them. His ban is absolute.
It came into his mind to find some way
of ridding himself of the ruthless foe.
There once were two brothers, sons of someone,
whose names I never knew. Their night-work roused
a monster from its rest: A murderous creature
started stalking the marshes, marauding round homes
110 and making its den at the bottom of a certain mere.
Very few ever go into those parts
since it hangs over wolf-haunted slopes,
wind-whipped crags and treacherous fen-paths—a joyless place!
Hidden within these halls, these horrid haunts,
Grendel's mother lurked. No one knows exactly
where these repulsive demons first appeared,
born into captivity among Cain's clan,
whom the Creator had outlawed and condemned as kin-killers.
They are all alien spirits doomed far beyond mankind's
120 understanding: night-journeyors exiled from Heaven
and scavenging the darkness, shunned by light.
One of these creatures came up stealthily
from the moors under cover of night
and headed for the high stockade of the hold.
All the godlike guards were asleep except one:
that man kept watch against woe as others slept.
Under cloud-murk he moved towards the dwelling,
shouldering along like some walking fortress,
headed unhesitatingly for the herohome.
There inside He found Hygelac's thane,
130 140 sleeping after supper. But sorrow attended him,
grief woke the warrior when wailing began,
a cry from captive throats echoing loudly.
That horrible shrieker carried off thirty men,
smatched away and slunk out with each body
felled in the flockfold, faring home
with his catch, exultant with slaughter,
delighted with his Night-work and greedy for more.
So Grendel left the lofty building,
hot-blooded and flushed up from his feast,
boasting of breach of board and bedroom.
140 Then as dawn brightened and day broke,
Grendel's powers of destruction were plain:
their wassail was over, they wept tears and wailed aloud
for their dead chief whom death had taken.
But now another sorrow oppressed the prince
who had paid dearly for the party in his palace,
that costly banquet. Then sitting in council
the grey-haired veterans ventured their best counsel:
they reckoned the wise and valued king
would never gain pleasure from any of his pleasures,
150 no joy from jewels nor any comfort
in children, no delight in his wife-to-be,
now she'd linked herself to such loss.
So inside He saw many strong minds,
manhood bitter. Then His mood lifted
as Hygd offered Him treasure. Her trust in His strength
was rewarded again and again. But her anxiety lasted
no longer once she'd learnt about Beowulf's reputation.
She trusted in the Geat's triumphs because what she'd needed most
160 between the sea-walls was to have someone wise enough
to bring deliverance. Then death claimed another victim:
Aeschere, an older counsellor loved by all,
Yrme-Lafe's right-hand man when the ranks clashed steel-sharp.
Nor could they perform cremation in honour of the slain,
no hallowed observance nor hoist him aloft;
already the savage special-powers-fiend
had withdrawn, reckless destroyer relishing his loot,
170 the plunder he'd carried partially eaten away
under ground. Hall-folk sat stricken,
warriors whimpered and wept for their dead king,
bewailing their loss. But now Beowulf spoke up:
'Let us install our swords each morning instead of mourning,
each new morn see action instead of tears and sighs.'
Many sturdy shields were strapped and shouldered,
weapons wielded; sorrow welled anew
180 but worldly-wise seafarers still set forth hopefully
on footpaths floored with fallow farmland,
following forest-tracks no fiordman fails to find
faring past headlands lapped by ocean waves,
keen to catch sight of the creature's lair.
Now suddenly the son of Ecglaf saw,
hardy scout on hazardous trails,
headland slopes and craggy scarps
190 and many memento mori marking past kills:
cliffs, wolf-dens and winding crays
facing precipitous drop-offs down which an unlucky
man might fall to finish fast in the fiord below--
that grey salt-chuck seething and surging.
They picked their path past precipice and cliff,
threaded their trail through thickets and cane-brakes,
laboured along narrow ledges until suddenly
they spotted huge stone archways fairly gaping,
200 black hole agape: boiling springs weltered,
and whenever the wind stirred an unspeakable stink
wafted upwards--anyone with an unerring sense of smell
would scent a fiend, a scavenger haunting filthy dens.
They discovered an unknown lake rucked and volatile,
overhung with groves grown out at odd angles
and hoary rock-faces. A host of serpents
swam in coils while savage monsters slouched onto headlands--
dragons and beasts that kept watch and ward
210 at water-level, monsters ravenous
after feeding-time, fierce and driven,
fired-up, fighting mad. From the lake-bottom lay
about like corpses waiting for judgement-day.
Their leader raised his weapon, drew blade-ring
bright steel-edged sword from scabbard-strap
then hurled his spear angrily athwart the lake
so point-first it pierced fiends prowling below,
220 striking straight home against one sea-monster
which struggled against shaft-point till spear-shaft snapped.
Beasts savaged the blade but were swiftly borne
underwater where weird things lurched together
while ashore the Geats exalted their lord
cheerfully chanting victory songs about Hygelac's nephew,
their hero dear to each clansman's heart.
Now another amazing thing happened:
230 the water witch carried her catch to the cliff's foot;
she coveted what belonged to others. Then brave retainers
brandished spears against sea beasts thronging round them,
their barbed points bristling--none thought about swimming
away delighted with such easy pickings.
Now Beowulf donned armour, indifferent to death;
240 his mail-shirt well-made by master-smiths clung fast,
linked limb-covering locked together like scales
by subtle skill of the smith who shaped it.
Not even grasping claws could grab hold of him,
nor dragon-jaws tear through tempered links.
And another item lent by Unferth lent courage too:
an ancient heirloom called 'Hrunting'
250 forged first by giants famed far and near
for artful etching--iron edges inset
with poison-twists--and peerlessly tempered,
tried and true. Never anywhere before or since
did better steel bite-on-battlefield,
though often obligated to perform outrageously.
Ecglaf's son hadn't exactly enhanced Unferth's reputation
by lending such a weapon to better a brother's-baneslayer.
260 Not that Unferth relented about righting wrongs
once swords started swinging. There sat each retainer,
still brave though shaken watching wave-borne corpses
bobbing under crags. Time passed quickly till suddenly
everyone caught sight of something uncanny rising
through ripples: ring-armoured rider astride stallion white
with gold-plated bridle-boss and bossed cheek-straps
jewelled headstall and horse-collar covered
270 with netted chain-mail. Wiglaf spoke formally:
'Many deeds daring deeds done unaided
have been done here today! Take care everyone,
stay safe! Above all take thought how you earn lasting fame
280 and win undying glory! Fight gallantly,
stand firm my friends! Nothing we've done deserves reproach!'
When he finished speaking Wiglaf spurred his horse forward,
galloped downhill till hooves hit gravel,
then dismounted quickly keeping close behind his lord.
His hand hovered hawklike above hilt-shield till both warriors
stood shoulder-to-shoulder under crag ledges.
Now Wiglaf spoke formally once more:
290 'Remember how you vowed always to pursue greatness,
300 take part in time-tested adventures! Now Sir deliver what we've counted on ever since we crossed the ocean here! You are strong past question! Nothing can keep us here, my king, courting danger any longer if your courage fails! My own spirit still holds firm! Hygelac my king will never reproach me if need arises! Fight gallantly! Guard yourself well! Stand fast my friend! Nothing we've done deserves reproach!' When Wiglaf finished speaking Weohstan's son drew breath deeply and roared defiance like boar enraged! His voice echoed eerily under eaves! Weohstan strode swiftly across open ground till he reached stone archway! There he stopped short! Shield boss shuddered! Sword rang! Sparks flew! Weohstan wielded ancestral heirloom! Its patterned pommel proclaimed proven prowess! Weohstan whetted appetite! Wyrmling wriggled! Weohstan whacked! Wyrmling writhed! Weohstan whammed! Wyrmling winced! Weohstan wielded! Wyrmling wilted! Weohstan won! |im_end|
